If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand:
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne;
And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead--
Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to think!--
And breathed such life with kisses in my lips,
That I revived, and was an emperor.
News from Verona! How now, Balthasar!
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
How doth my lady?
Is my father well?
How fares my Juliet? that I ask again;
For nothing can be ill, if she be well.
Then she is well, and nothing can be ill:
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
And her immortal part with angels lives.
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault,
And presently took post to tell it you:
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
Is it even so?
then I defy you, stars!
Go hire post-horses; I will hence to-night.
I do beseech you, sir, have patience:
Your looks are pale and wild, and do import
Some misadventure.
Tush, thou art deceived:
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
No, my good lord.
No matter: get thee gone,
I'll go hence tonight.
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
Let's see for means:
O mischief, thou art swift
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
What, ho! apothecary!
Who calls so loud?
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor:
Hold, there is forty ducats: let me have
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
As will disperse itself through the veins
That the life-weary taker may fall dead.
Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
Is death to any he that utters them.
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fear'st to die? famine is in thy cheeks,
Need and oppression starveth in thy eyes,
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back;
The world is not thy friend nor the world's law;
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.
My poverty, but not my will, consents.
I pay thy poverty, and not thy will.
Put this in any liquid thing you will,
And drink it off; and, if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
There is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls,
Doing more murder in this loathsome world,
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
Holy Franciscan friar! brother, ho!
Welcome from Mantua: what says Romeo?
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
Going to find a bare-foot brother out
One of our order, to associate me,
Here in this city visiting the sick,
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth;
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
I could not send it-- here it is again--
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearful were they of the infection.
Unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood,
The letter was not nice but full of charge
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger.
Friar John, go hence;
Get me an iron crow, and bring it straight
Unto my cell.
Brother-- I'll go and bring it thee.
Now must I to the monument alone;
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake:
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come;
Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!
Give me thy torch, boy: hence, and stand aloof.
Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew--
O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones--
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans:
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
The boy gives warning; something doth approach.
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night,
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
What with a torch! muffle me, night, awhile.
Give me the light:
upon thy life, I charge thee,
Whate'er thou hear'st or seest, stand all aloof,
And do not interrupt me in my course.
But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
In what I further shall intend to do,
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs:
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
More fierce and more inexorable far
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
Take thou that:
Live, and be prosperous: and farewell, good fellow.
For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout:
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
And, in despite, I'll cram thee with more food!
This is that banish'd haughty Montague,
That murder'd my love's cousin, with which grief,
It is supposed, the fair creature died;
And now is come to do some villanous shame
To the dead bodies: I will apprehend him.
Stop thy unhallow'd toil, vile Montague!
Can vengeance be pursued further than death?
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee:
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.
I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man;
Put not another sin upon my head,
By urging me to fury: O, be gone!
By heaven, I love thee better than myself;
For I come hither arm'd against myself:
Stay not, be gone; live, and hereafter say,
A madman's mercy bade thee run away.
I do defy thy conjuration,
And apprehend thee for a felon here.
Wilt thou provoke me?
then have at thee, boy!
O, I am slain!
If thou be merciful,
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.
Let me peruse this face.
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
What said my man, when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode?
I think he said Paris should have married Juliet:
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
To think it was so?
Give me thy hand,
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.
I will go call the watch.
A grave?
Oh, no, a lantern, slaughter'd youth,
for here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
O my love!
my wife!
Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty:
Thou art not conquer'd; beauty's ensign yet
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
O, what more favour can I do to thee,
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
Forgive me, cousin!
Ah, dear Juliet,
Why art thou yet so fair?
shall I believe
That unsubstantial death is amorous,
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
For fear of that, I still will stay with thee;
And never from this palace of dim night depart.
Here, here will I stay
With worms that are thy chamber-maids.
Here will I set up my everlasting rest,
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied flesh.
Eyes, look your last!
Arms, take your last embrace!
and, lips, O you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide!
Here's to my love!
Thus with a kiss...
I die.
Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
Have my old feet stumbled at graves!
Who's there?
Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
Bliss be upon you!
Tell me, good my friend,
What torch is yond, that vainly lends its light
To grubs and eyeless skulls? as I discern,
It burneth in the Capel's monument.
It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,
One that you love.
Who is it?
Romeo.
How long hath he been there?
Full half an hour.
Go with me to the vault.
I dare not, sir.
My master knows not but I am gone hence;
And fearfully did menace me with death,
If I did stay to look on his intents.
Stay, then; I'll go alone.
Fear comes upon me:
O, much I fear some ill unthrifted thing.
Alack, alack, what blood is this, that stains
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
What mean these masterless and gory swords
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
Romeo!
O, pale!
Who else? what, Paris too?
And steep'd in blood?
Oh, what an unkind hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance!
The lady stirs.
O comfortable friar! where is my lord?
I do remember well where I should be,
And there I am.
Where is my Romeo?
I hear some noise.
Lady, come from that nest
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep:
A greater power than we can contradict
Hath thwarted our intents.
Come, come away.
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
And Paris too.
Come, I'll dispose of thee
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns:
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming;
Come, go, good Juliet.
I dare no longer stay.
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
What's here? a cup, closed in my true love's hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end:
O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
To help me after?
I will kiss thy lips;
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
To make die with a restorative.
Thy lips are warm.
This is the place; there, where the torch doth burn.
Yea, noise.
Then I'll be brief.
O, happy dagger,
this is thy sheath.
There rust, and let me die.
The ground is bloody;
search about the churchyard:
Go, some of you, whoe'er you find attach.
Here's Romeo's man; we found him in the churchyard.
Hold him in safety, till the prince come hither.
What misadventure is so early up,
That calls our person from our morning rest?
What should it be, that is so shrieked abroad?
The people in the streets cry Romeo,
Some Juliet, and some Paris; and all run,
With open outcry toward our monument.
What fear is this that startles in our ears?
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
Warm and new kill'd.
Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Till we can clear these ambiguities.
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
Where are the parties of suspicion?
I am the greatest, able to do least.
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Myself condemned and myself excused.
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet.
O heavens, O wife,
Look how our daughter bleeds.
This dagger is mista'en-- for, lo, his house
Is empty on the back of Montague--
and it mis-sheathed in my daughter's bosom!
O me! this sight of death is as a bell,
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
Come, Montague; for thou art early up
To see thy son and heir more early down.
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead to-night;
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath.
What further woe conspires against my age?
Look, and thou shalt see.
O thou untaught! what manners is in this?
To press before thy father to a grave?
Where be these enemies?
Capulet?
Montague.
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love.
And I for winking at your discords too
Have lost a brace of kinsmen: all are punish'd.
O brother Montague, give me thy hand:
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
Can I demand.
But I can give thee more:
For I will raise her statue in pure gold;
That whilst Verona by that name is known,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
As that of true and faithful Juliet.
As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie;
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
A glooming peace this morning with it brings;
The sun, for sorrow, will not show his head:
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished:
For never was a story of more woe
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.